One of IT's many important roles is ensuring the core organizational activities execute as planned and that disaster recovery and business continuity plans are in place to limit the risk and impact of disruptions and catastrophic events. In most industries, organizations are required by various contracts and regulatory bodies to have a contingency plan in place and to continuously test and revise contingency plans. Another common requirement for regulated industries is uptime, the amount of time client data and resources are available on the servers. Availability is often measured in the number of nines (including the whole number) found in a percentage. For example, if an organization is required to have 99.999% uptime, it is stated as "five nines." This means the organization is required to have an average of less than approximately three seconds of downtime per week.

High availability solutions provide replicas, or copies, of critical systems that can be deployed when the original systems are not available.

Disaster recovery plans (DRPs) rely on solutions to ensure that systems can recover from catastrophic events in a reasonable amount of time with minimal data loss.

When disruptions do occur, business continuity plans help define how to resume services to customers and vital business operations, while auxiliary services may remain offline. While these conditions are not ideal, such plans allow the business to operate with limited resources until services are fully restored.

Data mirroring, data backups, and off-site storage are some of the strategies used for disaster recovery and business continuity. Data mirroring involves setting up the operating system to simultaneously write copies of the data on several storage devices. If something happens to one drive, another drive will be used in place of the faulty one, enabling the systems to recover functionality quickly without significant degradation of service. Data backups can be stored on any data storage device, but tape archival is common for businesses. Tape drives are inexpensive and can be transported to an off-site location. Off-site locations are a common solution for disaster recovery; if the primary site is damaged in some way, the data can likely be restored at another site.

Off-site storage locations are often found in other states. Salt mines and caves are popular locations for physical storage because of the low humidity and the protection provided by the earth's terrain. Storing data in the cloud is another popular option. Storing a copy of company data in the cloud improves the ability to recover, as many public cloud service providers replicate their data across various geographic locations.

IT professionals often refer to storage as hot or cold. The key difference is that the hotter the storage solution is, the quicker an organization's data can be retrieved and normal IT operations can resume after a disaster.

| Hot storage  | Hot storage allows organizations the quickest access to restore critical data in the event of a disaster or catastrophe. Hot storage solutions typically involve the latest and greatest storage equipment and the fastest protocols. In addition, hot storage is typically located close to the client or in multiple locations to ensure fast access. Some hot data storage solutions include Microsoft’s Azure Hot Blobs and Amazon's AWS service, but these premium solutions can be quite expensive because of the high-performing resources and protocols involved. |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Cold storage | Cold storage offers less frequent access and is maintained on minimal equipment that is considered lower performance. Returning to normal operations after a disaster is slower with cold storage. Some examples of cold storage include tape backup, offline cloud storage, and even some online services such as Amazon Glacier and Google Coldline. One significant advantage of cold storage, however, is that it is less expensive than hot storage.                                                                                                                 |
